Hey guys, this video is to some extent about
veganism, vegan politics, animal rights, human
rights, those concepts and how we use them
in vegan politics, but it's also with the
issue of belief itself.
I got some intelligent questions, responses
and reactions to my recent video saying that
I do not believe in animal rights and some
of them may or may not have gotten the message
that in a more recent video, I think I uploaded
a day or two later, I also clarified in the
very real sense I do not believe in human
rights, if we’re talking as a matter of
belief, no that’s not something I believe
in, doesn't mean the concept is completely
meaningless and I put in some caveats and
counter examples in that self-same video explaining
my position on human rights.
But I’ll show this intersects with practical
everyday questions of how we organize vegan
activism.
I had a message in response to me, sent back
saying more or less, this is a paraphrase,
more or less quoting; “if humans have human
rights, why would animals not have rights?”
Thus saying I'm using a double standard or
perhaps guilty of speciesism or what have
you.
Now my perspective that question is just as absurd as saying if humans have poetry,
why do animals not have poetry, so my claim
here is not that human rights don't exist,
in some absolute ontological sense, I also
would not claim that poetry doesn't exist.
However clearly when we're talking about poetry,
we're talking about something creative and
abstract and something that's you know deeply
couched in cultural and aesthetic considerations.
Whether or not something is poetry, I mean
I can show you a poem translated from medieval
Japanese into English, modern English, and
you may ask yourself; Is this poetry?
And I can show you Sanskrit poetry translated
into English and you may wonder; Is this poetry?
And I can show you even poetry of twentieth
century poetry written in English in California
in the 1960s and you may ask yourself; Is
this poetry?
Whether or not something is poetry, whether
or not you can recognize it as poetry, whether
or not you can appreciate or enjoy it as poetry
gets into a lot of tricky questions that are
not based in a strict and simple sense of
belief, right?
But if you ask me do animals have poetry?
My answer is no.
Poetry is part of human society and we may
write poems for or about animals, we may project
poetic qualities unto animals in our works
of art, we may you know depict them in a poetic
way, we may in a sense have animal poetry
within human culture, but this is so to speak
a set of abstract and largely aesthetic values
human beings have created.
And likewise when we talk about rights, human
rights, partly what we're talking about is
a very simple legal idea, I mentioned that
in an earlier video, do you or do you not
have the right to drink alcohol in a public
park, in some countries you do and some you
don’t, so that's the difference between
England and Canada, you know do you or do
you not have the right to drive a car under
these circumstances, those circumstances,
it's different.
And partly it's a very simple cut-and-dry
legal issue, but we all know to a large extent,
the reason why people get so emotional about,
the reason why people get so passionate about
human rights is that it also gets into this
realm of aesthetic, poetic and indeed ultimately
ethical issues, this is why people you know
become so animated about rights and why some
people find it convincing or moving to state
the case for veganism in terms of animal rights
or in terms of human rights, trying to say
this this is an extension of the anti-slavery
crusade at least.
There's a quotation from Thomas Hobbes' Leviathan
that comes to mind. Hobbes says laconically
that these social conventions,
things like human rights, he is not, human
rights discourse didn't really exist during
his lifetime, but these barriers that define
society, they remain in place due
to the danger, though not the difficulty of
breaking them.
And that's the other brutal reality of human
rights, animal rights, or what have you.
To a large extent you know peace exists in
the shadow of war and discourse within polite
society is to some extent created, vitiated
and backed up by the threat of violence, it's
by enforcement ultimately that questions of
human rights become so important.
You know are you or are you not going to go
to a local city park and prevent someone from
drinking alcohol there, if there's no enforcement,
well if you have the law, either the people
can drink alcohol in a public park that it's
a civil right, it's a human right, or that
they cannot, one way or another this comes
down to matters of enforcement.
And there also I have to say, if you ask the
question this way; do animals “have” animal
rights?
In the same sense that human rights, no they
don't because animals cannot enforce animal
rights, animals are precisely reliant on humans
to imagine and project these values, project
them onto animals and for humans to then
enforce these rights against one another.
So again this is a unique asymmetry - and
many people including Tobias Leonardo in his
new book, which I'm going to do another review
on, maybe talk to Tobias also, invite them
to do a conversation or debate with me about
it - these are issues that other people in
the animal rights movement or vegan movement
recognize also, that this is fundamentally
different from a situation like the liberation
of slaves, where we can ask the slaves themselves
to determine their own rights and interests, to take on these responsibilities. Whereas instead we're talking about a situation
of perpetual dependency, perpetual inequality,
even if you want to declare that all animals
are equal to humans, which some vegans want
to do, there's a perpetual inequality because
their rights are in fact our rights projected
onto them, created, imagined and enforced
by human beings and human values.
So, for me a profoundly related issue here
comes up, from by watching a new video from
vegan gains, I think it is very easy for people
to imagine that if only we had a society in
which everyone mouthed these principles, in
which everyone either believed or recited
these pious hallowed principles we'd have
a profoundly more compassionate society, a
profoundly less violent society, so my point
here is, I do not believe in animal rights,
I do not believe in human rights and I think
some of the people who support and propound
these notions, they themselves also do not
believe them and yet they believe that the
world would be a better place, our society
would be a better society if only everyone
around them would pretend, would recite and
pretend they believed in these principles.
That we would have a less and less violent
society, less and less of violence of man
against man, of the human beings against animals
and so on.
I describe my philosophy as nihilism, but
specifically as historical nihilism, I'm really
interested in learning the lessons of history
and what that means to me is different than
what it means to someone who's an ideologue.
If you believe this, I would urge you to spend
some time studying the historical reality
of Theravada Buddhist societies, whether you're
looking at medieval Sri Lanka or medieval
Thailand, these are societies, historically
that are many ways more appealing than a medieval
Christian society or a medieval Muslim society,
it is no doubt true that in many, many ways,
living in medieval Sri Lanka, medieval Thailand
would be more pleasant than living in medieval
Saudi Arabia or even medieval Germany, medieval
France, right?
I don't, let's set that aside.
However, it is very significant that in a
society, in a traditional Theravada Buddhist
society, where people would literally mouth
the words of non-violence and compassion,
day after day, year after year, in which chanting
these principles and believing in these principles
was a daily feature of society, it was a cornerstone
and bedrock of the religion, public religion,
popular religion and also the religion of
state.
Nevertheless, these were societies based on
torture, torture of human beings, exploitation
of animals and slavery.
They had a very real slave trade, now it was
very different from the history of slavery
in the United States of America, but nevertheless,
slavery is slavery, and involved also the
whipping and torturing of slaves.
But you know these are societies that preached
compassion to such a remarkable extent and
yet I mean in Sri Lanka for example, crowds
were delighted by watching someone being tortured
to death, you know with an elephant, having
a human being riding on an elephant, you know
crushing a human being to death and that elephant
tearing the person apart and so on, this was
not only form of torture and execution, but indeed public entertainment in the midst
of a society.
Medieval Cambodia, or pre-modern Cambodia,
again profoundly Buddhist society and yet
they had their equivalent of gladiator games,
of men killing each other in public, martial
arts combat, fighting each other and crowds
would show up and cheer, and the parents of
the young men who would be seriously maimed and sometimes killed, you know, seriously
injured and sometimes killed, in these you
know public martial arts displays, seeing
no problem with it.
And again needless to say, all of these societies,
the whole society ate meat, including the
Buddhist monks who preached these virtues
of non-violence and compassion, so I do not
believe in animal rights, I do not believe
in human rights, I do not believe in the efficacy
of belief itself, ultimately that's the point
of nihilism in my perspective is the critique
of belief, as such, the rejection of belief
and I think we can learn a lot from looking
analytically, sympathetically, but analytically,
at the real differences between historical
societies that have preached these beliefs.
And please, I mean within living memory, you
had communist societies that piously preached,
that piously believed in so many virtues about
human rights, I mean has there ever been another
society more fanatically devout in its belief
and espousal of human rights than the Soviet
Union, than Russia, the whole Soviet-aligned Russian
block.
And yet what really were human rights in that
society?
Has there ever been another society more devoutly
and more fanatically obsessed with the rights
of workers?
Of labor unions?
And yet we all know in a very real sense,
the Soviet Union workers had no rights, especially
not the right to unionize, neither do they
have those rights in communist China, even
smaller communist countries scattered here
and there around the world okay.
There is a profound lesson for us to learn,
that's directly applicable to vegan politics
in those cases, and there's a profound lesson
for us to learn about belief itself and ideology.